Welcome to session 119,
Resume and Automatic
Termination in Mac OS X Lion.
My name's Peter Ammon.
I'm an engineer on the
Cocoa Frameworks team.
We're talking about Resume
and Automatic Termination.
So Lion is about bringing features
from iOS forward to the Mac.
And one of the features that
users love on iOS is how apps
pick up where they left off.
When you switch to an app,
it restores its state.
And the app may or may
not have terminated.
The underlying Unix process may
or may not have exited in the
time between you switching away
and switching back to the app.
Users don't know and they don't care.
This is a much simpler application
model than we have on Snow Leopard
where users must manually quit
and relaunch applications.
So Mac OS X Lion is moving
in that same direction.
And two ways in which we're
doing that are called Resume
and Automatic Termination.
So I'll start by talking about Resume.
We'll go over the API.
We'll see a bunch of demos.
And then in the second portion,
I'll bring out my colleague, David Smith,
who will talk about Automatic
Termination and show you a demo of that.
So, Resume.
As you may have guessed,
the point of Resume is that apps
simply resume where they left off.
and they do this after quit,
logout or a crash.
And I'm going to show you a
demo of that last one right now.
This is a Mac OS X Lion.
I'll start by launching
a few applications.
There's a text-edited app
with a few documents open.
We'll open a picture of a lion.
Put that there.
I'll open Safari.
Maybe a few Finder windows.
Let me make this a little smaller.
So what I'm going to do is
send sigkill to login window.
And that's going to effectively
crash login window and by extension
all the applications including
finder text that you see here.
And if all goes well,
what you will see is that the screen
will go a little wonky for a few
seconds and then all the applications
will come back as if I had never left.
So let's give it a try.
Isn't that cool?
So let's be clear about
what just happened.
All the processes died.
They all restored their state
when they were relaunched,
and they did it just using the
APIs that I'll show you today.
And to prove that, I'm going to turn on
private browsing in Safari.
Now, when private browsing is on,
of course, the application doesn't--
The windows are not written to disk.
No state about them is recorded,
not in the bookmarks or
history or any of that,
including in Resume.
So when I repeat this exercise,
notice by the way it remembered
the last command I did,
which was kill all.
When I repeat this,
I expect to see every window
come back except Safari.
And there it is.
Back to slides.
And by the way,
that's not an SSD machine or anything.
That's a normal spinning hard drive.
Why Resume?
Why are we doing this?
As I said before, it's about simplifying
the application model.
Users are going to come to expect
that applications don't lose their
state when they quit or when the
applications crash or when they restart.
And eventually we'd like to get to the
point where your Mac will be able to
silently install an update overnight
when you're asleep and then reboot and
all the state will be restored exactly
as it was and the user won't even know
that the update has been installed
aside from all the nice bug fixes.
So you might be thinking, "Well,
that's pretty nice,
but I can do this on my own.
Why should I use the
Cocoa APIs to do this?"
Well, one answer is,
if you think about it,
there's an awful lot of state to restore.
A window has a window frame
on a particular display,
on a particular space,
and maybe the window's minimized,
maybe it's full screen.
It's a lot of state to keep in mind.
And also by using Resume,
you integrate with the
rest of the system.
For example,
the inter-application Z-order
was preserved for these
windows after the crash.
Another example of that is if
you hold down the Shift key
when you launch an application,
it will not restore state.
That's a power user feature.
And by using Resume,
you pick those up automatically.
And lastly, it's really easy.
Incremental adoption is very possible,
meaning you don't have
to throw a big switch.
You can make more and more
of your windows restorable.
And it complements existing
persistence mechanisms.
So maybe you already know
how to restore state.
That's great.
You have a huge head start.
You don't have to throw any of that away.
You can integrate your existing
restoration into Resume.
So let's give an overview of the API.
This feature is inspired by iOS,
but the Mac has many challenges
that are not present on iOS.
For example, Mac applications often
have multiple windows,
and those windows can
reference documents,
which may be on a network share
or an external hard drive.
In general,
there's just a lot more states
that applications can get into.
In fact, there's additional state
from plugins and frameworks.
For example,
the font panel has its own state.
So here's how we're
meeting those challenges.
So this is the lifecycle
of a window under Resume.
Initially,
some restorable window is open,
in this case a Pages document.
Cocoa will notice that this
window is open and it will ask
the window to encode its state.
When the user quits or logs out,
or crashes of course,
and then relaunches the app,
Cocoa will notice, "Hey,
this application had a window that
had a restorable state that was
open on the last time the app was
run." And it's going to ask the
component responsible for that
window to provide that window again.
So the component will provide the window,
possibly creating it or possibly
returning an existing window.
Cocoa will then take that window
and apply the state that was saved
on the last run to the window.
So you see the window goes from
blank to being filled with content.
And once again,
we're back where we started.
We have a restorable window that's open.
So as you can see, the Resume API is
centered around Windows,
although there is support for
state attached to NS application
as well for global state.
And every component can take
responsibility for its own Windows.
So AppKit can take responsibility for
restoring the font panel or color panel.
Your application can restore
the Windows it knows about.
If your application has plugins,
they can restore their own Windows, etc.
As we saw, there's two phases.
There's recreating the
windows that were open,
and then there's restoring the
view state within those windows.
So here's phase one.
Here's the API for recreating windows.
To mark a window as this is a
window that I would like to restore,
you just simply call setRestorableYes.
In fact, this is on by default for any
window which has a title bar,
a titled window,
and it's off for windows that don't,
borderless windows.
Next, you set the Restoration class.
This is the class that's responsible
for recreating the window when
the application is next launched.
This is what I meant by each component
can take responsibility by component
as reflected as a class in the API.
And lastly,
the class implements the Restore method.
This is the method that gets called
when the application is relaunched
and Cocoa wants to restore one
of the windows that was open.
So let's zoom in on this method.
The responsibility of the class is
to invoke the completion handler,
that third parameter that takes
an NSWindow and an NSError.
It's going to invoke that
with the corresponding window.
Now,
the identifier parameter is just a way
to distinguish between several windows.
For example, if your class restores a
few well-known windows,
it can distinguish them by setting
an identifier on the window to
determine which window to restore.
And this is set up, by the way,
in Interface Builder,
the Interface Builder part of Xcode.
The state parameter can be used
to track even more information,
for example a document URL.
We'll see more of that in a bit.
Now, so for example,
here's how AppKit restores
the font panel.
It starts by just marking
the font panel as Restorable.
It sets a Restoration class
to the FontPanel class itself.
Why not?
and it implements this
restoreWindowWithIdentifier method
and all it does is immediately
invoke the completion callback
with self-shared font panel.
Now note this window may
have already been created.
It's perfectly fine to pass a
window that's already been created
to the completion callback.
will also be possible to copy
the completion handler and invoke
it at some point in the future.
If you have an
NSDocument-based application,
there's some extra integration
that goes on with NSDocument.
NSDocumentController will set the
restoration class of all your document
windows to the DocumentController itself.
and then it will reopen the
windows by first reopening the
documents and then attempting to
derive the windows associated with
the documents from the document.
This is a very customizable process.
One way to customize it
is to simply override the
method I illustrated earlier,
restoreWindowWithIdentifier
on the document controller.
So this would be invoked when
it's time to reopen a window
associated with a document.
Or if you don't want to
take responsibility for
reopening the document,
but you do want to control
how windows are derived,
you can override Restore
Document Window with Identifier.
And I'm going to give you a
demo of this entire process now.
Let's get rid of all this.
Oops.
Command-option-Q there.
So I'm going to start with base Sketch.
This is Sketch as it's
shipped in Snow Leopard,
and we'll see how to make its
windows restorable progressively.
So if I just run Sketch--
If I run Sketch,
it's going to open an untitled document.
And I can, of course, add some shapes,
drawing to it.
And then when I quit,
it's going to ask me if I want
to save it or not because
Sketch has not adopted autosave.
So if I don't save it,
And then I relaunch Sketch.
It doesn't come back because
the document wasn't saved.
I repeat the process,
but this time I'm going to
choose to save it when I quit.
My Sketch document.
And then I relaunch it.
It will restore the document.
So Sketch hasn't done anything to adopt.
The reason the document's coming
back is because of the NSDocument
integration that I talked about earlier.
And by the way, any time you want to
test Resume from Xcode,
you have to be sure that it's enabled.
If you go to edit your scheme and you
go to the options of the run step,
you'll see a disable state
restoration checkbox.
That's a reference to Resume.
You want to make sure it's unchecked
and then you can test Resume.
I think it's unchecked by default.
I'm going to quit Sketch.
So let's go to a version of Sketch in
which I've enabled autosave.
And this is all I've done.
All I've done is override autosaves
in place on the Sketch document.
Hopefully you saw the autosave
inversion session earlier.
When I run Sketch with this--
You can see it brings back the document,
and this time if I make an untitled
document and I'll add a shape to it,
I'll minimize this one for fun.
Now when I quit, it brings back,
you can see, the minimized document but
also my untitled document.
So previously it would have warned me.
Now it just brings it back.
That illustrates how autosave makes
for a much better user experience,
especially with Resume.
So let's say I open the Inspector window
and the Grid Options window.
And I quit Sketch and I run it again.
These windows aren't brought back,
so let's make these windows restorable.
So, these windows, of course,
are set to be set by default
because they are titled windows.
So we have to set a restoration class.
And you'll see the restoration
class for each of these
windows is just the self class,
that's the SKT app delegate class.
Now, in the RestoreWindowWithIdentifier
method,
which I've implemented,
we start by getting the actual
application delegate because
this is a class method.
And because we only have
these two global windows,
we can distinguish them
using the identifier.
So we're going to say if the
identifier is equal to Inspector,
then we're going to get the Graphics
Inspector and get its window.
Otherwise, if it's equal to Grid,
we can get the window.
Otherwise,
it's a window we don't know about,
but we want to make sure that we still
invoke the completion handler with nil.
This would come about, for example,
if I ran an earlier version
of Sketch with save state
from a future version.
And by the way, these identifiers here,
I simply set in the, here's the window.
You can see in the class properties,
or the object properties,
that there's an identifier field
and that's where that grid and
inspector identifier came from.
So that wasn't a whole lot of work.
Now when I run Sketch and I show
the inspector and I show the grid
options and I quit and I run it again,
these come back.
And if they were on another, you know,
their frame is restored,
if they're minimized, et cetera,
that would all be,
that state would all get restored
automatically by NSWindow.
So there's a feature of Sketch.
If I hold down Option,
I can make a new window for a document.
And you can see that the two
windows reflect the same data.
If I edit one, it appears in the other.
But if I quit,
and I relaunch.
Only one window is brought back.
This is of course because NSDocument
doesn't know how to create multiple
windows and the document by
default only creates the one.
So this is an excellent candidate for
one of the methods I talked about,
the restore document window.
This is called when the document
has already been reopened,
but you want to derive a window from it.
So here's all I've done here is
restored-- I've implemented a restored
document window with identifier state
completion handler on the SKT document.
If I wanted to,
I could call through to Super,
but in this case,
I'm just going to create
a window controller,
add the window controller,
invoke the completion handler,
and release the window controller.
This is essentially the same thing
that happens when you choose new
document window from the menu,
except, of course,
for the completion handler.
So, with this method implemented,
I can create a new window.
And I quit.
And I relaunch it.
And it opens both the windows.
So you can see how we've sort
of incrementally adding Resume
functionality to Sketch.
So we took windows that were not
restorable and made them restorable.
But which windows should be restorable?
Well, most windows should be,
but there are some exceptions.
For example,
if your window is very transient,
like it's a tool tip or
it's a shielding window,
those don't need to be restorable,
like a menu or a pop-up,
something like that.
If the user does not want to restore
the window and they've indicated that,
of course then it should
not be restorable either.
We saw that with the private
browsing example in the first demo.
If the window's job is done in some way,
for example,
when you install an application and
you get a sort of window which just
says "Install Complete," that window
doesn't need to be restorable because
it's no longer very interesting.
And if your app cannot restore a window,
it's good practice to mark the
window as not restorable just
so that there's no confusion.
Hopefully you can make those
restorable in the future.
So now that we've got our
windows back on screen,
how do we restore state
within those windows?
So every component within the window
has its own private store of state,
which is an NSCoder.
And by component,
I mean every view within the window,
the window itself, its window controller,
and the document associated
with the window controller.
And that's true for NSApplication.
It also has some state
that it can restore.
Now, when the state gets dirty,
it invalidates its state by invoking
self-invalidateRestorableState.
This is sort of like setNeedsDisplayYes.
It indicates I need to have my state
written to disk to be recorded.
And this is a very inexpensive call.
It's very fast because it doesn't
actually do any work initially.
It just marks that particular
component as being dirty.
Now, at some point in the future, though,
that component, the view, for example,
will be asked to encode its state.
This is a method
encodeRestorableStateWithCoder
will be invoked.
This is a method you would override
to associate state with a view.
This typically happens when the app
is deactivated or on a timer after the
last call of invalidateRestorableState.
And then when the
application is relaunched,
each component will be passed
its state from the last run via
the method restoreStateWithCoder.
So the state that was encoded
in encodeRestorableState is now
available in decodeStateWithCoder,
or excuse me, restoreStateWithCoder.
There's two useful delegate
methods on NSWindow.
If all you want to do is just
associate a little bit of state with
a window without-- but you don't
want to make an entire subclass,
you can implement the delegate method.
Window will encode RestorableState,
and Window did decode RestorableState.
And as a delegate,
you can encode your own RestorableState
into that-- into the Windows NSCoder.
and furthermore,
if you have some properties
which are KVO compliant,
you can override the class method,
Restorable State Key Paths.
What this will do is Cocoa will
observe all these key paths
and notice when they change.
When they change,
it will encode the new value to
disk and when the app is restored,
it will automatically use KVC to set
those properties back on each component.
This is a really easy one-line way to
get some state persistent and restorable.
So this is a very general mechanism,
but what state is appropriate
for this mechanism?
Here's a text edit window, for example,
and you want to think about this state
as being associated with the view and
controller layers of the MVC model.
So for example,
restoring the selected range or the
scroll position of the text document.
And by the way,
NSTextView will do both of those for you.
But you would not want to restore,
for example,
the actual text of the document.
That's part of the model state,
and that should come from
typically a file on disk,
for example, or whatever your model is.
This can cause an interesting
challenge because the view and
model state may get out of sync.
For example, if while text edit is quit,
I go into an Emacs and I change the file,
when I restore the window,
it's going to have a different
text than it had before.
And if you're not careful,
it can cause a problem.
For example, at one point early in Lion,
the selected range would get restored,
and if it happened to
be beyond the new text,
it would throw an exception
because we tried to restore
a range that was too long.
So you need to be sure
to validate your state.
All right,
I'm going to give a demo of how we can
make sketches window state-restorable.
So I need to switch to this thing.
So you'll notice here if
I zoom in on this document,
the 200, and maybe I'll scroll a bit,
and I quit,
Can I relaunch?
It's taking me back to 100,
so the zoom is not restored properly.
So this would be a --
let's see how we do that.
Now, the Resume property,
turns out this is a KVO and KVC compliant
property with a keypath factor.
So to make this restorable,
all I need to do is override
RestorableStateKeypaths,
invoke super.
This is on the scroll view itself,
by the way.
Each view can take
responsibility for its own state.
I invoke super-restorable-state keypaths,
and I just add the object,
my keypath for the zoom.
That's all I have to do.
Now when I run Sketch,
I zoom in and I'll
scroll a bit and I quit.
So now that zoom is saved
in my persistent state.
When I relaunch,
it's now zoomed to 200% and
you'll notice also that the
scroll position was restored.
That's in a scroll view encoding and
restoring its own scroll position state.
So that was a really easy way if
you have a KVO or KVC compliant
property to make that restorable.
Now if I select a few of
these figures here and I quit,
And I relaunch.
You'll notice that the
selection isn't restored.
So let's make this sketch save
and restore its selection.
So because the selection is
a little more complicated,
we're going to use the
EncodeRestorableState
and Decode-- excuse me,
RestoreStateWithCoder method
to persist this state.
On the SKT graphic view,
which is the view that draws the
graphics and tracks the selection,
I'm going to override
EncodeRestorableStateWithCoder.
I start by invoking super in case a super
class has any state it wants to restore.
And then I just call
selfEncodeObject SelectionIndexes.
This is an NSIndexSet of the
graphics that are selected,
and I pass it the key SelectionIndexes.
I can use any key I please.
Now in the restoreStateWithCoder method,
I'm going to first call super
restoreStateWithCoder so that the
superclass can restore its own state.
I'm going to decode
the selection indexes,
and if I have them-- now,
I might not have them if I ran
an earlier version of Sketch,
so I want to validate it.
I check it.
It's not nil.
Now I need to make sure that the index
set is not out of bounds because,
as I mentioned,
the document contents may have changed
independently from the Restorable State.
So here's a way of just validating
that every index is no larger than
the number of graphics I have.
Once I've done that,
I simply call self-change
selection indexes with the
validated selection indexes.
This is the funnel point that all
graphic selection changes go through.
And the third piece of the puzzle
is whenever that gets called,
whenever the user changes the selection,
I need to
Invalidate the Restorable State.
So here we are.
In Change Selection Indexes,
all I'm going to do is add a line,
Self-Invalidate Restorable State,
which will ensure that my
state for this view is encoded
before the application quits.
So now if I run and I'll
select a few figures here,
and I quit, and I run it again,
if I get this out of the way,
we'll see that it restored the selection.
Switch back to slides.
And again,
this is a very incremental process.
We just keep adding more and
more state that gets restored.
So Sketch is a simple application.
What if your app is more complicated?
For example,
if your application wants to restore
a window associated with a document,
it may need to know the document's
URL before it can even create the window.
So this brings me back to that state
parameter in the first part of my talk,
Restore Window with Identifier.
That state parameter is a collection,
it's a union of the Restorable
State of the window,
the window controller, and the document.
It's a combination of all of them.
So this allows you to get access
to the Windows private state before
the Windows has even been created.
Now if you, in reading this state,
discover that maybe the
document's been deleted,
you want to be sure to invoke the
completion handler anyway with nil.
If you don't invoke
the completion handler,
the app will appear
unresponsive until you do.
So always invoke it.
So let's go over some more advanced
topics and best practices for an
app living in a Lion Resume world.
So here's how NSWindow
encodes its first responder,
which is the view that
has the keyboard focus.
It just does it.
It calls encodeFirstResponder
for some key.
Now this may seem dangerous, right?
Is this going to archive
an entire view hierarchy?
Well, in fact, it doesn't.
Encoding an NSResponder
just does not call,
um, not actually archive that responder.
Instead, it archives a reference to it.
And when you decode it,
it's going to return a responder
that's already in the window.
So when you encode your first responder,
Then you decode it,
you're going to get the view that
represents whatever view had the
keyboard focus in the previous run.
and in fact references
can even cross windows.
For example, the color and font panel,
they encode their target which is
typically in another window entirely.
When the state is restored,
they can decode their
target and that just works.
Sandboxed apps.
So you may be worried, "Hey,
my application has a file open.
If I relaunch my application,
how am I going to be able to get
permission to reopen this file?"
The secret here is to encode a URL to
the file in the restorable state and
any NS code in the restorable state,
so in the view or in a window
or in NS application itself.
URL is special in that it will
automatically give you permission
to reopen this file when your
application is next launched.
This is true even if the file
has been moved or renamed because
URL encoding uses bookmarks.
You have to encode the NSURL itself.
You can't create your own bookmark
as an NSData and encode that
because it will not be recognized
as an NSURL and you will not get
permission to reopen that file.
or of course if you're NS Document based,
NS Document will take care of this for
you without you having to do any work.
So I alluded earlier to the
fact that if you already have a
mechanism for restoring your state,
it's very easy to integrate with Resume.
And I'd like to share how
we did that with Mail.
Mail, of course,
has an NSUserDefaults state
restoration mechanism.
It writes its window
state to user defaults.
and integrating Resume was
only about 60 lines of code.
It was not difficult at all.
So here's the basic
idea of how it was done.
We give each window a unique ID,
for example, a UUID or just an
auto-incrementing integer.
And we record that UID in both the
Restorable State and NSUser defaults,
its existing persistent state mechanism.
Then when the application is relaunched,
Mail restores its windows via NSUser
defaults like it's always done.
And then it goes through each of the
Resume callbacks that it got and decodes
that UID from the Restorable State.
It locates a window that's already
recreated and then invokes the
completion handler with that window
or nil if it couldn't find it.
So the UUID acts as kind of glue between
the Restorable State mechanism and its
existing NSUser defaults restoration.
Here are some best practices.
When your app is launched,
don't assume that the user is
going to use it right away.
For example, in my crash demo,
you saw that all these
applications were relaunched.
And if they started opening new
windows or throwing up dialogues,
it would have been a bad user experience.
Your app can be relaunched
in the background,
so keep splash screens, etc.
They'll be perceived as annoying,
so keep those to a minimum.
Don't create windows an
application did finish launching.
Your app may already have
windows that have been restored.
If you do create a window here,
it can lead to what we
call the N+1 effect,
where you launch an application,
it creates a window, you quit,
you relaunch it,
it restores the first window,
creates a new one, so now you have two,
three, four, etc.
That's not good.
So what you want to do instead is
prefer application open untitled file,
the delegate method.
This is called at the right time when
either the app is launched in the
foreground and there's no windows
or the user clicks on the dock,
etc.
Now the exception to this is if
your app doesn't even make sense
without a particular window,
like iPhoto, iPhoto has just one window,
you can always create that
window anytime you like.
Be prepared for unexpected changes.
So when your app is relaunched,
things may-- state may have
changed between when it was run
before and how it's running now.
The screen size may have changed.
The user may have toggled.
The scroll bar preferences-- the
file contents may have changed
because of iCloud or other reasons.
So you always want to validate that
your saved state still makes sense.
And don't forget versioning,
so you maybe have saved state from
a previous or future version of
your application that you want to
be able to version that correctly.
and partial state restoration is okay.
Though higher fidelity
is obviously better.
As you saw with Sketch,
we incrementally added more and
more Resume capability to the app,
but there's still more we can do.
We're never going to be able
to restore everything exactly,
so it's okay to do a very good job.
But the more you use Cocoa,
the less work it's going to take.
For example,
if your application uses Fullscreen,
if you use the Fullscreen
APIs we're introducing in Lion,
it will be automatically restored
to Fullscreen when the user
quits and relaunches the app.
But if you roll your own
Fullscreen implementation,
which you can do,
you'll have to do your own
work to integrate with Resume.
So here's a summary of Resume.
Resume is, of course,
about restoring state.
Cocoa tracks the windows that
are open and asks those windows
to encode their restorable state
and then writes that to disk.
Each component can take
responsibility for the windows
it knows about and can create.
And each NSResponder,
each view for example,
also can take responsibility
for its own state.
So with that, I'm going to bring up my
colleague David Smith,
who will tell you about
Automatic Termination in Lion.
Thank you, Peter.
Good morning, everyone.
I'm David Smith.
Like Peter, I'm an engineer on the
Cocoa Frameworks team.
And I'm here to talk to you
about automatic termination.
This is part of the triad of features,
autosave, resume,
and automatic termination,
that all go together to simplify
the application model in Lion.
It's a new technology.
So first, I'm going to talk about
what exactly it's doing,
give you a brief overview of it.
Then I'm going to talk about some
benefits that it brings and why you
might want to adopt it in your app.
I'm going to give you an overview of the
API and how you can adopt it in your app.
And then I'll talk briefly about
some future directions that
we might take this feature.
So what is automatic termination?
First and foremost--
It's a new user model.
It lets users focus on using
apps instead of managing them.
So instead of having to quit
applications and relaunch them,
instead of having to
manage memory themselves,
when they run out of memory,
quit an app to free it, et cetera,
they can just focus on
getting their work done.
It does this by decoupling the
concept of apps and processes.
In pretty much every historical system,
an app has always had a
process associated with it,
and a user process has always
had an app associated with it.
Neither of these is true, necessarily,
in Lion.
I'll go into more detail
about how both of those happen
later on in this presentation.
So this is the application
lifecycle in the Stone Age,
AKA Snow Leopard.
Users have to spend time
quitting applications,
launching applications.
They have to keep track of
what's open and what's not open.
We'd like to change that,
focus on just using it and letting the
system manage these sort of extra duties.
You can think of it as sort of like
garbage collection for processes.
So, there are a couple of side
benefits that we get by doing this.
We also get to bring iOS-style
memory reclamation to the Mac.
When the system's running out of RAM,
it can terminate unneeded
processes to free them up.
And on the flip side,
if it doesn't need to
terminate processes,
it can keep them around
after the users quit them,
which gives you effectively
instant relaunch.
So I'm going to go into a little bit more
detail about why you would want automatic
termination for your application.
What's in it for me, basically.
First and foremost,
it's about playing well with others.
If your application is a
good citizen on the system,
then all the other applications on
the system are going to perform well.
And on the flip side,
if all the other applications
are good citizens,
then your application is
going to perform well.
So it's in everybody's best
interest to play well with others.
It's also going to meet the user
expectations for new applications.
We're pushing this pretty heavily.
We'd like it to be the
new way things work.
And applications that don't do it
are going to start looking old.
Instant Relaunch is another side benefit.
It doesn't happen in all
that many situations in Lion,
but it could happen more in the future.
And even in the situations
it does happen in Lion,
it's very nice.
And finally, as I've alluded to,
this gets you ready for
possible future plans,
which I'll talk about near
the end of this presentation.
So at this point,
hopefully I've sold you on the basic
concept of automatic termination.
So we're going to look into a little
bit more depth of how it works and
how to adopt it in your application.
The API is very simple.
We modeled it after the Sudden
Termination API that was
introduced in Snow Leopard,
which brings me to a
very important aside.
Sudden Termination and Automatic
Termination are not the same thing.
Pretty much every time I've
mentioned this to somebody,
they're like, "Oh,
I think I remember that." No, you don't.
This is new.
Sudden Termination is about quitting
very quickly without doing a lot
of work or touching much memory.
Automatic Termination is the new
UI model and the new process model.
We would, of course,
like you to participate in both.
That makes it so that when the
system terminates your application,
it can do things like terminate it
without touching a lot of memory pages,
which might induce more paging activity.
It can also terminate it very quickly
without getting in the user's way
or slowing down the foreground app.
But if for some reason
you can't adopt both,
you can do one or the other or neither.
They're completely independent.
So the first thing you need to do
is turn Automatic Termination on.
You can do this in one of two ways.
You can set a property list
key in your Info.plist,
and it supports Automatic Termination.
And that's a Boolean property,
so you just set it to true,
and we'll take it from there.
Alternatively,
if for some reason you can't do that,
you can use the NSProcessInfo API,
set Automatic Termination enabled,
and just pass yes to that.
If you pass no, it won't do anything.
Don't do that.
Once you've done that,
this is where it gets
There we go.
This is where it gets very
slightly more complicated.
You need to identify each place in your
app where you're doing an activity.
And I realize that's
a somewhat fuzzy term,
but basically the way to
think about it is this.
If your application
were to quit right now,
would that break something
the user was doing?
So, for example, in iChat's case,
If there's an open
connection to the IM server,
you don't want to quit.
That would terminate your connection.
You'd appear as offline to people.
That's not very good.
In, say, Photoshop's case,
if you have an extremely
long-running filter going,
you don't want to terminate
in the middle of that.
In general, any application that has
a long task running on the
user's behalf should do this.
And what you do is
just before doing that,
you call disableAutomaticTermination
on NSProcessInfo.
And you can pass a reason argument here,
which is a string.
That doesn't actually do anything.
It's just a hook for possible
debugging tools like DTrace,
which will help you match up your
calls to disableAutomaticTermination
with future calls to
enableAutomaticTermination to make
sure you don't get those unbalanced.
Because the next thing you need to
do is once you've finished doing
your work on behalf of the user,
you return control to the system by
calling enableAutomaticTermination,
again on NSProcessInfo.
So I mentioned before that there are
two types of automatic termination.
You can have processes with no
application associated with them,
and you can also have applications
with no process associated with them.
These happen in related but
slightly different situations.
If your application has open
windows that are not visible,
all those open windows are restorable.
Peter just showed you how to do that.
You're not the active application.
You haven't disabled
Automatic Termination.
And the system is running
out of available memory.
Then the system is free to terminate
your process while leaving your
application appearing to still run.
If blue dots are on in the dock,
it will still show up
with a blue dot there.
If your application
isn't pinned to the dock,
it'll still show up there.
It'll appear in Command Tab.
As far as the user can tell,
it's still running normally.
When they click on it
or switch back to it,
and David Smith will be here to help you.
The system will relaunch it transparently
and all they will see is a slight
lag as it comes back which is much,
much better than the system going into
VM paging and everything slowing down.
On the flip side,
you can have processes with
no running application.
This is where the new UI comes in.
If your application has no open windows,
if the user has closed
all of their documents,
it's not the active application,
you haven't disabled
automatic termination,
and at least one window
has ever been open,
then your application
will appear to quit.
This might seem a little bit unexpected.
This is a new usability
model that we're pushing.
We've seen a ton of people
switching from other systems,
including iOS,
that expect applications to
not require an explicit quit.
You may have seen people with
every single app in their dock
open and no windows and wondering
why they're running out of RAM.
At this point,
the kernel will go through the
list of processes and look for ones
that are using a lot of RAM and
send them a message asking them
to terminate themselves quietly.
Sorry, that happens if the system
runs out of memory after the
application has appeared to quit.
If the system doesn't run out of memory,
then the process will continue sitting
in the background quietly using no CPU,
and if the user relaunches it,
then it will just come
back instantaneously,
which is pretty cool.
So I'm going to give you a brief
demo where I convert Sketch over
to Automatic Termination.
My starting point here is
the Resume-enabled version
of Sketch that Peter left me.
I'm going to open Sketch,
close its documents.
That one's actually already
Automatic Termination enabled.
Well,
So what you just saw there was
automatic termination in action.
I wasn't actually expecting
that to happen quite yet,
but that's fine.
So if I go to Activity Monitor,
you can see that Sketch is
actually still running.
And if I open Sketch now,
it's going to come back instantly.
If I actually hit Command-Q,
that's going to quit Sketch.
But if I close the last
window and switch away,
that will leave it running.
Until I ask the system to reclaim memory.
So I'm going to do that by
using a debugging tool that
we have called TalAgent.
That name may seem eerily
familiar to those of you who
have been here in decades past.
It's unrelated to the previous one.
And I pass the -memory_pressure
argument to that.
This is wrapping on a new line.
Let me make that wider.
You can see that the
Sketch process is still running,
and when I trigger
system memory pressure,
Sketch disappears
completely transparently.
It freed all of its memory,
and whatever process triggered the memory
pressure is now free to use more memory.
So I'm going to add the Info.plist key,
and it supports automatic termination.
And that's a Boolean.
So Boolean.
and David Gass.
That's literally all it took to adopt
basic automatic termination in Sketch.
However, I've added
and David Smith.
We will assume the user doesn't
want their important work
going away when I switch away.
So what I'm going to need to
do here is go to the file with
my important work function,
which is SKT AppDelegate.
Find my doBackgroundOperation
method that I added here,
which is just showing a progress panel.
And around that,
I'm going to add a call to NSProcessInfo.
Disable Automatic Termination.
And for the reason I'm going to put,
doing important work.
As I said before,
the reason argument is really
not important for functionality.
You just want it to be descriptive
so when you're debugging,
you can tell what the heck is going on.
And that needs to go where
we are starting to do work.
And then when we're done doing work,
I just add a call to re-enable
Automatic Termination.
And you want the reason argument
that you passed to match.
So now if I build this and run
Sketch and start doing background work,
switch away,
Sketch now still appears to be running.
That is exactly what the user
would expect in this case.
Their important work was not lost.
and if I then stop doing
background work and switch away,
Sketch disappears from the doc.
So the key things that
we've learned here,
I'm going to switch back to the slides.
Opt-in:
Enable automatic termination using the
NSSupportsAutomaticTermination key.
Then disable automatic
termination around important work.
And finally, test with the TalAgent tool.
You can find that in
System Library Core Services and you
pass the -memory_pressure argument.
I believe there's a man
page for it if you forget.
We really only want you
to use this for testing.
I realize it's tempting to stick
a utility out there for $10 that
triggers system memory pressure
as a cleanup tool or something.
That really,
really won't do anything and we
don't guarantee that this tool is
even going to exist in the future.
It's just a debugging tool.
But definitely test your
application because you don't
want it doing anything unexpected.
So to recap,
enable automatic termination,
disable and then enable around activity,
test with Tal Agent.
So I'm going to finish up here by
doing a bit of blue sky talking.
I realize we don't
normally do that at WWDC,
but I think there's some really exciting
things that could be done with this.
So I want to do a little
thought experiment.
I want you to imagine a world
where there literally isn't a way
for users to quit applications.
where applications go away entirely on
their own when the user's done with them,
and users don't really
need to manage them.
And as an extension of that,
where there's no way to tell
if an application is running.
And that would also mean that a
user has no reason to need to know
that an application is running.
All they need to know is,
does this application
have open documents?
Is this application
doing work on my behalf?
And that's a completely
separate concept from,
is it running?
We can just eliminate this concept
from the user's vocabulary and
simplify the system in the process.
And finally,
I'd like you to imagine a world in which
your parents never call you and say,
my computer's slow, fix it.
I think we can do something like this.
Lion is a big step in that direction.
And if all of your applications are
on board with Automatic Termination,
then I think we can keep pressing
forward in this direction.
Thank you for coming to our talk on
Resume and Automatic Termination,
and hopefully you will adopt
it in your applications.
You can get more information
from Bill Dudney.
He's our Applications
Frameworks Evangelist.
We have documentation on everything
that we've talked about here on
the developer.apple.com site.
And you can come to our developer forums
where we are indeed reading your posts
and most of the time replying to them.
There's two related sessions
which have already happened,
so hopefully you went to those.
There's What's New in Cocoa,
where we discussed a number of
things that are new in Cocoa,
as well as Automatic
Termination and Resume.
And there's Autosave and Versions,
which tie very closely into this.
You noticed that Autosave allowed the
Resume demo earlier to work automatically
for documents that have titles.